---
layout: post
title: TDD's Value Proposition

date: 2014-07-13
---

I begin my final three weeks of Dev Bootcamp tomorrow, and am most looking forward to taking a deep dive into test-driven development in the context of Rails starting Monday. The reason for my interest is that I have come to believe junior programmers with strong TDD fundamentals can be significantly larger value-adds out of the box than their non TDD-inclined counterparts.

Evan Dorn of Logical Reality Design has an excellent thirty minute video on [this very theme](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HhwElTL-mdI). Dorn contends that the difference between programming and software engineering lies in tests. Modular and concise code springs from the test driven framework because programmers write small snippets at a time to make failing tests pass. Tests are short and to the point; the code to make tests pass is correspondingly short and sweet. If programmers operate under the TDD paradigm from a program's inception, they significantly lessen the risk of needing to pony up capital for a code rescue later down the line.

Admittedly, there are some strong counterpoints to this school of thought. One I constantly hear is that getting your product out the door in X amount of time is worth the Y hours of refactoring that can be done at a later point in time. Refactoring by definition will not improve the basic functionality of your program, so one has to consider carefully the costs of delaying a product release when the delay will not materially improve the user experience. A second argument against TDD (and yes, there obviously are far more I'm not covering here) is that certain tests really test nothing and / or encourage tunnel vision on passing the tests at the expense of more important architectural decisions. Rails creator David Heinemeir Hansson in part championed this argument in April on his [blog](http://david.heinemeierhansson.com/2014/tdd-is-dead-long-live-testing.html), decrying unit tests specifically. Both arguments hold water and present complex-enough issues to warrant more attention in future writings. 

Rather than focus on these arguments, I want to argue that TDD is a valuable skill in particular for junior developers (such as myself), because TDD (i) introduces scientific rigor to the coding process, (ii) acts as a strong defense against poorly written code and (iii) doubles as a superior communication tool to make the intent of code clear. I would presume the number one concern most employers have in hiring junior developers is their potential to detract value from companies by writing dependency-laden, dysfunctional code with hard-to-trace errors capable of driving away clients. TDD demands an approach that goes a long way towards eradicating this potential.  

I've had a chance to look at some of the code from previous DBC final projects ([this app](https://github.com/cicadas-2014/quotemunk) for managing Kindle quotes is among my favorites), and have been struck by the test-driven approach evident in all of them. DBC students write unit-based, controller-based and feature-based tests in Rails that comprehensively test the entire application. In the coming weeks, I intend to post on testing techniques  in Rails and the advantages to be had from a TDD-oriented approach. 













